---
title: John McLaren Galbraith b. 1918
familysearch: https://www.familysearch.org/tree/person/details/GZXY-NM9
findagrave: https://www.findagrave.com/memorial/121012934/john-mclaren-galbraith
---
***John McLaren Galbraith***, son of *[John McCorkindale Galbraith](galbraith-john-mccorkindale-1886-young.md)* and  *Margaret Hardie Young*,
was born  21 April 1918.  He died 14 May 1961.[^burial]

Mentioned in [The Campbeltown Book](/sources/campbeltown.md) as "probably the first Kintyre man to cross the Atlantic by air."[^campbeltown-book]


Not sure of original source, but found https://www.arrse.co.uk/community/threads/namesake-uncle-gracie-and-monty.305827/page-2

> 2 Sep 2021
> 
> Squadron Leader John McLaren Galbraith, DFC, GM.
> 
> Kintyre's tragic war hero.
> 
> Kintyre was one of the areas which suffered most losses in the trenches of the 1914-18 war. This was recognised by the Ministry of Defence in presenting the captured 'Minenwerfer' artillery piece to the area as spoils of war. It now stands outside the Heritage Centre with a short explanatory notice. In the Second World War, the 51st Highland Division, with its large contingent of Argyll riflemen and artillery, formed the principle line of defence at St Valery, protecting the more fortunate members of the British Expeditionary Force, who were able to escape via the beaches of Dunkirk. Most of the survivors of St Valery ended up in Prisoner of War camp for the next five years and suffered ill health thereafter. Though I knew many of them, -such as George Lewis, Hugh Thomson and Jock McMillan, very well, and spent many hours in their company at various times, none of them ever discussed the war.
>
> The ex-serviceman I knew best, however, was John Galbraith of Polliwilline farm. My mother was a close friend of John's mother and so between the ages of 10 and 14 my young brother and I were despatched to Southend on Ramsay's milk lorry most Saturday mornings to spend the day 'working' at Polliwilline, to be collected at night by my mother after she and Mrs Galbraith had enjoyed afternoon tea and the best of the local gossip.
> 
> My brother Jackie spent every minute of his day glued to the side of his hero, Hector Galbraith, a very close relationship which they both maintained for the rest of their lives, but Mrs Galbraith always insisted I spend as much time as possible with John, her eldest son. John had returned from the war to a farm that had worked well in his absence and his role was somewhat limited by his lack of strength compared to his brothers, but he had responsibility for the young stock and did his share of the more mundane tasks such as mucking out the byre every day! John always wore a large black beret on his head, even at meal- times. I never thought this strange, it was what he did. I did not realize that it was to cover the major burn scars over the entire dorsum of his head.
> 
> John and I had many interesting expeditions. Down at the Wee Holm, we would seek out fish and crabs in the tidal pools and John would tell me their Latin names and also often the common name. A particular target was the "Dougiepoll" or blenny (Lipophrys pholis) with its allegedly poisonous sting but we also on one occasion saw a rare male pipefish, (Nerophis lumbriciformis), carefully shepherding its shoal of tiny offspring. John also had a wee dinghy and on calm days we would go out fishing for lythe (Pollachius pollachius).
>
> At the edge of the burn we would dig out the poisonous 'hech-how' more commonly known outside Kintyre as wild hemlock. He showed me the distinctive long tunnel carrying the burn through an escarpment on the road to the shore, which is only wide enough for a child to pass through and was known to his siblings and then to others who were inducted into traversing it, as the 'Keeky-boe'. We also spent days checking out and weeding the line of trees he had planted overlooking the coast. It was a very exposed spot and he was concerned to ensure they got a good start and then to see how they did thereafter
>
> Before lunch, when all the tasks were done we often went to the hay-loft and he would talk about aspects of his wartime activities, the countries he had visited and the people he met. Gracie Fields was someone who obviously made a great impression on him. He never really talked about the war per se, however, just pleasant and interesting anecdotes relating to for example the initials of the different Allied air forces he had flown with, to the pioneering work his team did transporting large bombers across the Atlantic from Canada with only just enough fuel aboard for the flight, or the qualities of the daring South African pilots he worked with. As a naive small boy I thought that John had had an interesting time during his war service. I had no idea what he had really been up to.
>
> Only very occasionally, and never in regard to me, John would get very angry. It was never over anything important but could be frightening. My mother, who was very much a 'people person' told me much later that John's mother encouraged my visits as they calmed John down when he was 'not feeling too well' and a couple of times he also came to see my mother for refuge when he was in the town and had suddenly had what she called one of his 'upsets' .
>
> John was involved in a number of activities in Southend. He was Clerk of the Church Congregational Board for a few years and he was a stage manager for the Dunaverty Players amateur drama group. Later he got involved, as Commanding Officer, with the Campbeltown Air Training Corps. In this latter role he was allowed, exceptionally, with permission, to use his substantive rank of Squadron Leader. Campbeltown Squadron 1405 of the ATC was the only one with a Squadron Leader as its active Commanding Officer. Before evening parades, he would often come to our house, in Lochend, for a light meal and to fastidiously re-polish his shoes, check his uniform and always ensure he was setting the right example to his young charges.
>
> Although he was engaged in various activities and well cared for at home, John's mood swings started to become more severe and his mental state to deteriorate. In 1958 he was admitted to Crichton Royal Institution, Dumfries. It was only much later, after his death in Dumfries in 1961, at the early age of 42 that I became aware of the background to John's war - the stories he did not tell me! That he was decorated twice for valour, and that this gentle highly intelligent and very humane person was carrying within himself that unseen and dreadful traumatic injury of warfare that never goes away. It is now recognised as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
>
> John McLaren Galbraith was born in Southend, Argyll, in 1918. After completing his studies at Campbeltown Grammar School he matriculated in the University of Glasgow with the intention of studying Physics and Astronomy. His mother believed that it was his ultimate intention to study for the Ministry or possibly as a missionary like his uncle, after he graduated.
>
> John's father, universally, but very respectfully, known as "wee Johnnie Galbraith" had had a very distinguished career in the Argylls in the First World War, being promoted through the ranks from Private to Captain as his regiment fought its way across France and Belgium. Thus, it came as no surprise that his son while at University, would also be a volunteer in the territorial reserve. Before he was able to complete his studies he was conscripted into the army in 1939 and serving as a lance bombardier in the British Expeditionary Force in France. On 2nd June 1940, his regiment was among the lucky ones who were evacuated from Dunkirk.
> 
> On return from Dunkirk he was given ten days leave and then appointed to the mundane task of driving fuel tankers for the Royal Army Service Corps. Unsurprisingly, in August 1941, he applied for transfer to the RAF and was sent to flying school in Pensacola, USA for pilot training. Once fully trained John began a period of very dangerous flying for Ferry Command a new and short- lived organisation responsible for transferring newly built and often barely tested aircraft from the aircraft factories, occasionally in the USA but more usually from the A.V. Roe plant in Toronto, Canada, to the front-line operational squadrons.
> 
> This was pioneering work and dangerous. Before Ferry Command, only about a hundred aircraft had attempted a North Atlantic crossing, in good weather, and only about half had made it. Over the course of the war, more than 9,000 aircraft were ferried across the ocean, in all weathers. Eventually, crossing the Atlantic became a routine operation, presaging the inauguration of scheduled commercial trans-Atlantic air travel.
> 
> John did tell me something about this in our chats in the barn, but usually about the different types of plane he had to fly and the specific allied air force they were for delivery to. Among the planes he ferried were Halifax and Wellington bombers but also Ansons and flying boats. He found the "Consolidated Catalina" and "Consolidated P2Y" flying boats nerve-racking in stormy weather, especially for landing on open waters. That was in fact all that he revealed about anything dangerous in his war.
> 
> The pages of the official 'London Gazette', however, tell us something very different. There are two types of 'Award for Conspicuous Gallantry,' one in the face of the enemy and the other for bravery when not under fire. John Galbraith was decorated at the highest level for both categories.
> 
> In January, 1944, he and airman Neil Forbes were the pilot and flight engineer respectively of an aircraft which stalled and caught fire when crash-landing on return from an operational sortie still fully loaded with ordnance. The 'London Gazette' relates: "Although suffering from shock, cuts and bruises they both managed to get out of the wreckage. Realising that 3 members of the crew were missing they immediately re-entered the burning aircraft, which was still carrying a full load of bombs, in an endeavour to rescue their comrades. Flight Sergeant Forbes located the rear gunner who had sustained injuries and whose clothing was alight. After beating out the flames he assisted the gunner clear of the wreckage and then to safety. Flying Officer Galbraith found the navigator unconscious and lying in the wreckage of the nose of the aircraft. Assisted by Flight Sergeant Forbes, who had again returned to the aircraft, Flying Officer Galbraith freed the navigator and then passed him to another member of the crew who had been able to extricate himself when the crash occurred.
> 
> One member of the crew still remained in the blazing wreckage. Flight Sergeant Forbes seized a fire extinguisher and managed to subdue and control the flames sufficiently to enable Flying Officer Galbraith to enter and search the tail of the aircraft. Unfortunately the remaining member of the crew was dead when found. Flying Officer Galbraith although severely burned and wounded displayed high qualities of leadership courage and unselfish heroism in circumstances of considerable danger. " Both men were awarded the George Medal, (GM), which is only granted for gallantry of an extremely high order.
> 
> John had been transferred to Coastal Command from Transport Command, and in April 1944, was piloting a Halifax out of St David's (South Wales) on reconnaissance when a force of seven heavily armed enemy vessels was sighted. Again according to the official 'London Gazette', " ..In the face of intense heavy and light anti-aircraft fire, Flying Officer Galbraith pressed home a most determined attack, setting one of the ships on fire. This officer has completed a very large number of sorties and has set a fine example of skill, bravery and devotion to duty." For this action under fire after a very large number of previous sorties, Flying Officer Galbraith was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, (DFC).
> 
> Towards the end of the war, when he had attained the rank of Squadron Leader, he served as personal assistant to Air Vice Marshall Sir Hugh Lloyd in Malta GC and later held a command in Greece, from which he returned to Britain to be demobilised. He then came home to Southend, all thoughts of continuing his University career abandoned and joined in the running of the Polliwilline and Langholm farms.
> 
> His health was never good. He suffered from severe and traumatic nightmares and slept very badly. As Sheila Litteljohn, his cousin and close friend describes in her 2011 memoire: " John, with whom I became good friends, was very imaginative and sensitive. I can understand how difficult it was for him to fit into life in the RAF during the Second World War. He never got over the horrors he experienced as a pilot and died when he was quite young. We used to go for long walks and he taught me much about the wildlife at the shore and general appreciation of the countryside." I enjoyed the same friendship with John, after the war, and can attest to that same sensitivity and interest in the wildlife of Polliwilline and its exquisite shore but also, like Sheila, I was latterly aware that he was a very challenged person.
> 
> John McLaren Galbraith DFC, GM entered the Crichton Royal Hospital in Dumfries, Scotland's premier Centre for dealing with Mental Illness of this type, in 1959. He died there in 1961, at the very early age of 42. His obituary in the Campbeltown Courier indicated that there was no doubt that his war service was responsible for this early and untimely death, "..for he was wounded on several occasions and, although he appeared to have made a good recovery, his deep suffering eventually reasserted itself."
> 
> The graveside services were conducted by the Rev James Marks and the Rev Angus McVicar of Southend Parish Church. The Campbeltown ATC Squadron provided a guard of honour 
and officers of the Glasgow and West of Scotland ATC Wing Headquarters also attended, as did representatives of Dunaverty Players. Southend had lost one of its finest sons and a whole community grieved.
>
> ... “When war is "over," it is never simply "over." The first war takes place during wartime. The second war, the far longer one, occurs when the fighting stops; this war is not over for years, most often for generations to come." .. Clarissa Pinkola Estes. 1995.

[^campbeltown-book]:  Page 355 of [The Campbeltown Book](/sources/campbeltown.md#page-355)

[^burial]: Find a Grave, database and images (https://www.findagrave.com/memorial/121012934/john-mclaren-galbraith: accessed 17 August 2022), memorial page for John McLaren Galbraith (unknown–14 May 1961), Find a Grave Memorial ID 121012934, citing Kilcolmkill Chapel Churchyard, Argyll and Bute, Scotland; Maintained by Joelle Colville-Hanson (contributor 48735492).
